---
layout: post
title: "Ep 4: An explanation of the Porter Stemmer algorithm in plain English"
date: 2019-04-15
---

<p>In the last post, I explored the effect that stemming vs lemmatizing vs. not dong either of those things had on the output of a Cluster Analysis on the first ten Oz books. &nbsp;Here, I&rsquo;ll go a bit deeper in exploring how stemming algorithms work. Well... how <em>one particular </em>stemming algorithm works: the porter stemmer.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>The algorithm, developed in 1979 by Michael Porter, first appeared in <a href="https://tartarus.org/martin/PorterStemmer/def.txt">this paper</a>&nbsp;as a part of a report titled <em>New models in probabilistic information retrieval. </em>For the super nerds out there, it was actually written in a now-obsolete language called <a href="https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~mr10/BCPL.html">BCPL</a> and was only around 400-lines long. Wow!, efficient. It&rsquo;s now, of course, implemented in various languages. Anyways, I digress.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>In the interest of keeping this blog accessible to people without extensive CS knowledge, I&rsquo;ll be keeping this explanation relatively surface level. However, I urge interested readers to check out the original 1980 paper (from which all of this info is shamelessly derived) &nbsp;as it is certainly worth a read. Here goes my attempt at a boiled-down version&hellip;</p>
<p>Before we begin, some definitions. The algorithms stablish some basic rules. Here they are: &nbsp;</p>
<ul>
<li><strong>consonants</strong> &nbsp;are all non-vowels.</li>
<li><strong>vowels </strong>are the letters A E I O U and sometimes Y. Y counts as a vowel only when it is preceded by a consonant.</li>
</ul>
<p>Words are then translated/broken down into the pattern of consonants and vowels that they contain. Consonants are denoted with the letter &ldquo;C&rdquo; and vowels with the letter &ldquo;V&rdquo;. Any number of repeated patterns of consonants are marked as [C]; and repeated vowels are marked as [V]. Patterns of vowels/consonants repeated <em>m </em>times are marked a (VC){m}, where m is the number if tmes the VC patter in repeated. For example, let&rsquo;s take to word Tree, whcih would appear as: [C][V] and would have am m value of 0. The word Trouble, on the other hand, would become [C][V][C](CV){1}. &nbsp;</p>
<p>As I mentioned in the previous post, stemmers use a series of rules to decide how to reach the stem for each word. In the case of the porter stemmer, rules follow this basic pattern:</p>
<p>If &nbsp;the word has &ldquo;some condition&rdquo; and &ldquo;some suffix&rdquo;, then replace &ldquo;some suffix&rdquo; with &ldquo;this other suffix.&rdquo; The condensed way that Porter&rsquo;s original paper uses to express this is&hellip;</p>
<p><code>(condition) S1 -&gt; S2</code></p>
<p>&hellip;where S1 Is the first suffix and S2 is the second suffix. While the conditions are often given in terms of the m value (for example, &ldquo;if for any given word m &gt; 2&hellip;&rdquo;) but is can also have the following parameters:</p>
<ul>
<li>Whether or not the stem ends in s</li>
<li>Whether or not it contains double vowels</li>
<li>Whether or not it ends in a double consonant</li>
<li>Whether or not it ends in CVC (consonant-vowel-consonant), where the second consonant is NOT W, X, or Y</li>
</ul>
<p>These parameters can be combined (using and, or, and not statements) to create more thorough and complex conditions. These rules are given in conjunction with each other, and when a word matches several of the conditions, the algoritm picks the condition that has the longest matching suffix. The paper gives the following example:</p>
<p><code><code></code></code></p>
<p><code><code></code></code></p>
<p>SSES -&gt; SS</p>
<p><code><code></code></code></p>
<p>IES -&gt; &nbsp;I</p>
<p><code><code></code></code></p>
<p>SS -&gt; SS</p>
<p><code><code></code></code></p>
<p>S -&gt;</p>
<p>&nbsp;For the above set of conditions, the word &ldquo;Caresses&rdquo; would match both SSES, SS, and S. However, since SSES is the longest suffix match, the algorithm would change &ldquo;Caresses&rdquo; into &ldquo;Caress&rdquo;.</p>
<p>The rest of the algorithm goes through a long list of conditions manipulating input words. I won&rsquo;t go through each of these conditions, as they are laid out pretty clearly in the paper.</p>
<p>&nbsp;That&rsquo;s the super-surface level explanation of how this particular stemmer works. I hope this post has helped shed a bit of light on one DH black box. More to come soon.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
