---
layout: post
title: "Ep 2: Lexos is to weed as NLTK is to speed."
date: 2019-04-08
---

<p>Hello, world! In my experience, some resources for computational research in the humanities are a bit like gateway drugs: once you get a taste, you keep coming back.* Once you get acclimated, you quickly become inclined to take it up a notch. And then, the next thing you know, it&rsquo;s 3am and you&rsquo;ve got fifty stack exchange tabs open...so it goes.</p>
<p>In all seriousness, as I wrap up my thesis, I&rsquo;ve been reflecting quite a bit on the past year and a half or so of research, coding, and archive-visiting. I&rsquo;ve learned so much throughout the whole process, and I figured that I&rsquo;d give a list of some of my favorite tools and resources along with a brief description of the kind of analyses they might serve. Perhaps, some undergrad will find this list helpful one day. Or perhaps not. Regardless, here it goes.</p>
<p><em>Disclaimer:</em> <em>This is by no means an exhaustive list, and I am by no means an expert. Some of these tools are industrial strength. Others are less involved, but they are a great way to get your feet wet with some quick and dirty analytics. Before you dive into a hefty project, please be responsible and learn a bit about the math behind the analysis. I promise, it&rsquo;s worth the extra work.</em> </p>
<h2>TOOLS:</h2>
<p><strong>Lexos:</strong> <a href="https://wheatoncollege.edu/academics/special-projects-initiatives/lexomics/lexos-installers/">This tool</a> is maintained by Wheaton College. It&rsquo;s an online interface (not dissimilar to Voyant) that allows you to manage, clean, analyze, and visualize a corpus. What I like about it is that it also gives you the opportunity to clean your texts as you see fit. This tool allows for custom-selected stop words, lemmatization, etc. The downside is that sometimes the server that Wheaton runs gets overwhelmed with users. Therefore, I wouldn&rsquo;t recommend using this for large corpuses of texts. On the website, there are instructions for downloading and running the program on your own local server. For those of you who are not familiar with the command line, this may be a bit tricky, but if you want to clean your texts without touching any code, it might be worth it. <br /><br /></p>
<p><strong>Stylo:</strong> <a href="https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/stylo/index.html">This</a> is a package in R. Using stylo requires essentially zero coding abilities, as the package has the ability to call up a &ldquo;graphical user interface&rdquo; -- ie: a window with clickable buttons that will do everything for you. In particular, I&rsquo;m a fan of Stylo&rsquo;s dendrograms and PCA graphs.</p>
<p><strong>Topic Modeling Tool:</strong> This is some great stuff. A <a href="https://github.com/senderle/topic-modeling-tool">GUI implementation of MALLET</a>, and you can even link metadata. Pro tip, graph the linked output to create timelines and more! Major shoutout to Scott Enderle for maintaining this. For those of you not familiar with topic modeling, check out <a href="http://www.matthewjockers.net/2011/09/29/the-lda-buffet-is-now-open-or-latent-dirichlet-allocation-for-english-majors/">this great blog post</a> by DH aficionado, Matt Jockers.</p>
<p><strong>ABBYY Finereader:</strong> Ever visit an archive and find a text that you just absolutely must investigate computationally, but a machine-readable version is nowhere to be found? Look no further. <a href="https://www.abbyy.com/en-us/finereader/?gclid=EAIaIQobChMI-aW9-Py_4QIVFFqGCh1QagFdEAAYASAAEgLH5fD_BwE">Finereader</a> is the only tool on this list that costs money, but boy is it cool.</p>
<p><strong>Natural Language Toolkit:</strong> NLTK is a python platform that makes cleaning, processing, and working with textual data so, so, so smooth. Calling NLTK a &ldquo;platform,&rdquo; however, does not really do it justice. It&rsquo;s got packages. It&rsquo;s got datasets. It&rsquo;s got beautiful, easy-to-follow documentation. Truly, it&rsquo;s a dream. NLTK is so expansive, however, that it is relatively pointless for me to attempt to summarize everything it is capable of. Instead, I will implore readers to visit <a href="https://www.nltk.org/">this link</a> to read more.</p>
<p>Though the list of DH resources goes on ad infinitum, for brevity&rsquo;s sake I&rsquo;ll stop here. Now that I&rsquo;ve provided all these tools, stay tuned for a post containing a slew of warnings about the dangers of software that puts analyses into a black box. It might be pretty, but don&rsquo;t be fooled&hellip;</p>
<p>Until next time!</p>
<p><br />*I assume this is how gateway drugs work. I don&rsquo;t do drugs. Drugs are bad. </p>

