---
layout: post
title: "Ep 5. Hello, again."
date: 2020-05-02
---
Hello folks, long time no write. Since my last post, I have:
-	Graduated college
-	Visited CERN and some large Swiss/French mountains
-	Moved to New Jersey
-	Started a full-time job in science publishing (and been promoted!)
-	Started a Master’s program in CS  
-	Weathered a global pandemic. 

What a year, 2019/2020. I’ve been a negligent blogger, but now that I’m quarantined for the time being, it’s time to get back on this train. I’ve just finished my first course in Java (thank you, Prof Arvind!), and I wanted to share some thoughts. 

 Java vs. Python:
Python was my first love. It’s the language where I discovered the thrill of “getting things to work,” and I think it will always have a soft spot in my heart. That, and the ease/flexibility allowed by its dynamic typing, makes it (so far) my favorite language to work with. That being said, I really did enjoy working in Java this past semester. 

While I think I’ll stick to Python data-analysis related projects, Java does have its perks. The way that Java handles classes and interfaces feels very intuitive. Additionally, I find that Java is just a bit more readable than Python. Some may disagree, but to me, the brackets, the semicolons, and the variable types make reading other people’s code so, so much easier than trying to follow Python’s indentations. I’ll probably turn to Java for large “shippable” projects, but I’ll always opt for python if I want to do a static analysis project, or a project that is mostly text-based. This brings us to the next observation…

 NLP in Java:
Okay, here’s where Python wins out. I did a new articles processing project in Java. There are some great packages written in Java (I used Stanford CoreNLP) however, I’ve found Python’s NLTK much easier to work with, particularly when paired with numpy. 

Furthermore, when I’m working with strings, the little things that Python offers over Java really add up, like
-	Being able to use negative indexing 
-	Easy, easy string iteration (yeah this is possible in Java but it’s far more verbose) 
-	All of the libraries! All of them!!


On Inheritance and Polymorphism:

My mind has been blown. Object oriented programming is beautiful. I’m tearing up with joy as I write this. 

For some reason, the first two programming courses that I took (one of which was in Python!!) did not broach the topic of OOP. My first introduction to the concept of classes, class hierarchies, interfaces, objects, etc, was this past semester in my Java course. All I can say is that my eyes have been opened and I am so excited to delve further, and to teach myself how to make the most of OOP in Python. 

Hooray for learning, and hooray for summer. Later, y'all. 
