---
layout: post
title: "Ep 6. Another Hiatus."
date: 2021-12-16
---

<p>I'm really terrible at this blogging thing. No consistency whatsovever. It's been well over a year, so I figured it was about time I wrote a post more well-aligned with the original intent of this site: my love letters to CERN...and publishing! That's mostly what I've been up to these days...</p>

<p>Two years ago, I took a long elevator ride. Wearing a hairnet and hardhat, and practically bouncing with glee, I travelled a hundred meters underground into a cavern in southern France, to accomplish one of my childhood dreams. When the elevator finally stopped, I was led down a narrow corridor, through a few doors, and then into a large room. While on the surface, a summer squall blew rain and hail—the sort that soaks you immediately—here, underground, the air was dry and cool and calm. It felt quite like stepping into a new world. Before me stood a sleeping giant: 15 meters high, weighing approximately 14,000 tons, and composed of layers upon layers of hand-built electronics...a miraculous machine that, while active, is capable of producing a magnetic field 100,000 times stronger than that of planet earth.</p>

<p>I stood before the CMS Detector, one of two general purpose particle physics detectors that led to the discovery of the Higgs boson, and a part of the Large Hadron Collider (or LHC). One of the world's largest and most collaborative hubs for "big science," the LHC is an experiment that, in the most basic terms, smashes protons together and picks apart the remnants left behind. It is in these remnants that scientists hope to find clues about the fundamental structure of matter, and ultimately, of the universe.</p>

<p>This is amazing in and of itself, but what is perhaps even more mind boggling is the equally gargantuan number of hands and minds that came together to make such a feat possible. When I stood before the detector, taking in its dizzying complexity and myriad of colors and components, I couldn't help but feel a bit overwhelmed. I imagined the many hours, careers, and dreams that have been dedicated to building and nurturing this machine---and the many discoveries that is has, and will continue, to usher in.</p>

<p>My time on CERN's campus was punctuated by treks on glaciers and gondola rides to dizzying altitudes—but no thrill matched that of simply being there, occupying a space where so many questions have been asked and answered. Most of my mornings were spent at R1—an on-site cafeteria and social hub, chatting with folks about their research and trying to wrap my non-physicist brain around the incredible work that is being done. In the afternoons, I'd sequester myself in the library, sifting through book after book, reading through the stacks.</p>

<p>What you do not often hear about CERN is that it has an incredible library, stocked with just about every physics and physics-related book that you can imagine. In this library, I found a vast ecosystem of ideas that was equally, if not more breathtaking than the detector itself. If standing before the detector felt like entering a new word, being in the library felt like entering a room with many worlds, shaped by a vibrant and unique community. It is not just the authors, editors, copyeditors, and publicists who shape these words, but also the many generations of scientists whose work has been built upon, iterated, expanded, and explored.</p>

<p>It is a precious feeling to have one's breath taken away by something immaterial, but it is not a rare feeling—or at least, it doesn't have to be. Even when, less than I year after I returned from CERN, the world slipped into the darkness and isolation of the pandemic, I found that feeling in my work, and in my reading. I found it in my colleagues, and in the many wonderful authors whose books we shepherded along.</p>

<p>We in publishing have the immense privilege of having a vantage point that allows us to watch people breathe life into ideas, time and time again. While each book may seem in some ways nondescript—two boards, some paper, some glue and thread and ink, each holds a world that is intricate and complex. Our currency is not in microelectronics and jets of physical energy, but rather in words and pictures and thoughts. We may not be uncovering the secrets of the universe (at least not always), but we are uncovering something—building something from discoveries that have been worked over and over and then forever preserved, lying in wait to be discovered all over again by some unsuspecting reader.  In each book, a world, shaped by many hands.<p/>
